In this section, we'll cover how to use Tableau
to calculate the drop off rate in each step of the funnel.
Calculating the drop off rate between each step in the funnel gives us
valuable information about where users fall
off during their journey to the desired action.
To calculate a funnel drop off rate using Tableau,
we can follow four steps.
First, review the available data to look for
the pieces of data that correspond to a user's steps in the funnel.
No matter if you're using Tableau or another calculation program,
you need to know what data you have available.
Of course, if you've been instrumenting each new feature and step a user can take,
then you know you'll have the data you need to create and analyze a funnel.
By looking at the data,
you can identify which events or pieces of
data represents steps in the funnel that you wish to analyze.
For example, event level data shows a user visited a page at 1:00 PM.
It might be a step in the awareness stage where the users saw and entered the website.
It also shows a user clicked on a button at 1:01.
It might be a step in the evaluation stage
where the user was interacting with the product.
By confirming the steps in the data,
you can prepare to analyze funnel interactions for all users.
In Tableau, reviewing the available data means finding
the dimensions that hold the event data relevant to the funnel.
Second, determine how the user's steps should be
ordered from first action to final goal step.
That means looking at all available steps and determining what steps
are relevant and can be taken by a user leading up to a goal.
Note that not all steps a user takes will always need to be included in a funnel.
For example, when creating a profile,
a user might be asked to upload a photo to personalize their account.
If uploading a photo is optional,
that step doesn't necessarily need to be included in the user funnel.
Funnel analysis generally concentrates only on the steps
that are required to occur in pursuit of a specific goal.
To that end, another part of determining step order is to confirm
which event represents the successful completion of the goal that is being measured.
Once the events in steps are known,
they should be placed in order as the user would experience them.
In Tableau, this means putting the events of interests from
top to bottom in a row or left to right in columns,
so they are ready for analysis as a funnel.
Third, count the unique sessions where a user takes each step.
A session is a period of time in which a user interacts with a site or product.
If a user interacts with the site or product at different times or on different days,
each of these would be a unique session.
If looking at a funnel where each visitor can only go through the funnel once,
then counting unique sessions will be the same as
counting the number of unique users who made it to each step.
For example, sometimes websites offer
a onetime discounted visitors that must be used in that shopping session.
Alternatively, if looking at a flow that a user can go through multiple times,
such as a feature that allows customers to review their previous purchases,
we might want to count the number of
unique user sessions that made it through each step in the funnel.
This will show how the funnel performs in general across
users with multiple trips through part or all of the funnel.
Finally, in Tableau, use a table calculation to determine the percent change,
i.e., drop off between steps.
This means using the count of unique sessions obtained previously to
evaluate the relative size of unique sessions from one step to another.
In the funnel as users drop out and the number of
users that make it to each subsequent step gets smaller,
the calculation will show the percent decrease between each step.
By looking at those steps with a higher percent change,
you can identify areas of greater
drop-off that may need investigation and further improvement.
In Tableau, to quickly calculate the percent difference,
you can apply a quick table calculation of
percent difference to the numbers generated in step 3.
Once the calculations are in place,
product managers use this information to look for steps with high and low drop off rates.
Areas with high drop off may need
further evaluation to determine ways to improve conversion.